Add the Swan lake Beta1 Release Note (#2324)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-beta1/RELEASE_NOTE.md

### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1 of the repositories below.

- [C2C](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-c2c/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22)
- [AWS Lambda](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerinax-aws.lambda/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22)
- [Azure Functions](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerinax-azure.functions/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22) 

## Developer Tools Updates

### Improvements

#### Debugger
- Added remote debugging support for the command that runs the Ballerina executable JAR
- Added support for debugging a single Ballerina test in Visual Studio Code

### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1 of the repositories below.

- [Language Server](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22+label%3ATeam%2FLanguageServer)

> - [OpenAPI](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-openapi/milestone/5?closed=1) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [OpenAPI](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-openapi/milestone/5?closed=1) 
- [Test Framework] (https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3ATeam%2FTestFramework+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug)
```

## Updating Ballerina

If you are already using Ballerina, you can use the [Update Tool](/learn/tooling-guide/cli-tools/update-tool/) to directly update to Ballerina Swan Lake Beta1 as follows. 

To do this, first, execute the command below to get the update tool updated to its latest version. 

> `bal update`

If you are using an **Update Tool version below 0.8.14**, execute the `ballerina update` command to update it. Next, execute the command below to update to Swan Lake Beta1.

> `bal dist pull beta1`

## Installing Ballerina

If you have not installed Ballerina, then download the [installers](/downloads/#swanlake) to install.

## Language Updates

### Improvements

- Worker deadlock detection has been improved to include the `wait` action.
- The `self` variable of an isolated object no longer needs to be accessed within a `lock` statement unless it is used to access a field that is either not `final` or is of a type that is not a subtype of `readonly` or `isolated object {}`.
- The `lang.xml:strip()` function does not mutate an XML value. Therefore, using the `lang.xml:strip()` function on immutable XML values is allowed.

### Breaking Changes

> - The Taint analyzer is disabled and the `--taint-check` option is removed. The annotations `@tainted` and `@untainted` were left intact as placeholders for backward compatibility. Any script that used to pass the `--taint-check` option to the `bal run` or `bal build` commands will fail.

Reviewer 2: Shall we make this the last one in the list? IMO, the others are more significant since this was not enabled by default.

[[users]]
username = "Jane"
location = "US"
```

### Breaking Changes

- The `io.ballerina.runtime.api.types.Type#getName` and `io.ballerina.runtime.api.types.Type#getQualifiedName` methods now return an empty string if no name was associated with the type. The `io.ballerina.runtime.api.types.Type#toString` method can be used to get the string representation of a type.
- `Wait` actions that wait for expressions that are not named workers can return errors now. The eventual type of such wait future expressions is now `T|error` where `T` is the type of the original return value.

### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FjBallerina).

## Standard Library Updates

### New Features

#### `graphql` Package
- Added declarative auth configurations
- Added support for optional types as inputs
- Added support for returning unions of distinct service objects
- Added support for inline fragments
- Added support for enums as input values

### Improvements

#### `cache` Package

> Marked the `cache:Cache` class as an `isolated` class.

Reviewer 3: Don't we add bullets when there's only one point? Seems a bit inconsistent to me.

```suggestion
- Marked the `cache:Cache` class as an `isolated` class.
```

Author: yeah, we don't need bullet points if there is not list and only one point.

#### `file` Package

> Marked the `file:Listener` class as an `isolated` class.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Marked the `file:Listener` class as an `isolated` class.
```

Author: We don't need bullet points if there is no list and only one point.

#### `graphql` Package
- Improved introspection validation and execution
- Added missing fields in the GraphQL types
- Improved the compiler plugin to validate inputs and return types
- Added support to use included record parameters instead of the `record` type in the listener initialization

#### `http` Package
- Improved the `http:Client` remote methods to support inferring the target type from the contextually-expected type
- Changed the listeners and clients to use include record parameters as configuration parameters
- Populated the error detail of `http:ClientRequestError` and `http:RemoteServerError` with the response payload and the headers
- Swapped the `mediaType` and `headers` arguments in the client remote methods

#### `sql` Package
- Added the SQL Array Value type support and introduced the new distinct array value types for identified SQL types
- Marked the `sql:Client` class as an `isolated` class

#### `websubhub` Package

> Included the auth configuration in the WebSubHub publisher client configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Included the auth configuration in the WebSubHub publisher client configuration.
```

Author: We don't need bullet points if there is no list and only one point.

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-standard-library/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%22Swan+Lake+Beta1%22+label%3AType%2FBug).

## Code to Cloud Updates

### New Features
Added the `@cloud:Expose` annotation to support custom listeners.

### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1 of the repositories below.

- [C2C](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-c2c/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22)
- [AWS Lambda](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerinax-aws.lambda/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22)
- [Azure Functions](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerinax-azure.functions/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22) 

## Developer Tools Updates

### Improvements

#### Debugger
- Added remote debugging support for the command that runs the Ballerina executable JAR
- Added support for debugging a single Ballerina test in Visual Studio Code

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Test Framework
- Introduced a flag to pass the expected coverage report formats
```

```toml
[admin]
username = "John Doe"
mail = "John@hotmail.com"
location = "LK"

[response]
method = "POST"
httpVersion = "HTTP_2_0"
headers.Status = "200 OK"
headers.Content-Type = "text/html"

[[users]]
username = "Jack"
location = "UK"

[[users]]
username = "Jane"
location = "US"
```

### Breaking Changes

- The `io.ballerina.runtime.api.types.Type#getName` and `io.ballerina.runtime.api.types.Type#getQualifiedName` methods now return an empty string if no name was associated with the type. The `io.ballerina.runtime.api.types.Type#toString` method can be used to get the string representation of a type if required.
- `Wait` actions that wait for expressions that are not named workers can return errors now. The eventual type of such wait future expressions is now `T|error`in which `T` is the type of the original return value.

### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FjBallerina).

## Standard Library Updates

### New Features

#### `graphql` Package

> - Added declarative auth configurations

Reviewer 2: Can't we just say
```suggestion
- Added declarative auth configuration
```

Author: It should be "Added *the* declarative auth configuration.". @ThisaruGuruge - Please advise.

Reviewer 3: There are multiple configurations, therefore I think it should be configurations.

Reviewer 2: Depending on the context I believe configuration is also used as the plural form. @praneesha, thoughts please?

Author: +1

- Added support for optional types as inputs

> - Added support for returning distinct service object unions

Reviewer 2: Is this
```suggestion
- Added support for returning unions of distinct service objects
```

@ThisaruGuruge

- Added support for inline fragments
- Added support for enums as input values

### Improvements

#### `cache` Package

> Marked the `cache:Cache` class as an isolated class

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Marked the `cache:Cache` class as an `isolated` class.
```

#### `file` Package

> Marked the `file:Listener` class as an isolated class

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Marked the `file:Listener` class as an `isolated` class.
```

#### `graphql` Package
- Improved introspection validation and execution
- Added missing fields in the GraphQL types
- Improved the compiler plugin to validate inputs and return types
- Added support to use included record parameters instead of the `record` type in the listener initialization

#### `http` Package

> - Improved the `http:Client` remote methods to support the contextually-expected type inference

Reviewer 2: Is it the target type that we infer? Can we say something like

```suggestion
- Improved the `http:Client` remote methods to support inferring the target type from the contextually-expected type
```

@chamil321 

contextually-expected type inference isn't quite accurate IMO. We infer the argument from the contextually-expected type

> - Changed the configuration parameters of the listeners and clients to include the record parameters

Reviewer 2: Aren't we trying to say we're using included record parameters? This doesn't convey that, right? How about

```suggestion
- Changed the listeners and clients to use include record parameters as configuration parameters
```

Author: @chamil321

> - Populated the error detail of `http:ClientRequestError` and `http:RemoteServerError` with response payload and header

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Populated the error detail of `http:ClientRequestError` and `http:RemoteServerError` with the response payload and the headers
```

- Swapped the `mediaType` and `headers` arguments in the client remote methods

#### `sql` Package
- Added the SQL Array Value type support and introduced the new distinct array value types for identified SQL types

> - Marked the `sql:Client` class as an isolated class

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Marked the `sql:Client` class as an `isolated` class
```

#### `websubhub` Package

> Included the auth configuration to the WebSubHub publisher client configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Included the auth configuration in the WebSubHub publisher client configuration.
```

### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-standard-library/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%22Swan+Lake+Beta1%22+label%3AType%2FBug).

## Code to Cloud Updates

### New Features

> Added `@cloud:Expose` annotation to support custom listeners.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Added the `@cloud:Expose` annotation to support custom listeners.
```

### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1 of the repositories below.

- [C2C](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-c2c/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22)
- [Docker](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-docker/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22)
- [AWS Lambda](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerinax-aws.lambda/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22)

> - [Azure Functions](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerinax-azure.functions/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22) 

Reviewer 2: These seem to be empty.

Author: @anuruddhal @xlight05

Reviewer 4: There are no fixes in the Docker repo. Tagged the other repo issues with milestones.

## Developer Tools Updates

### Improvements

#### Debugger

> - Added remote debugging support for the command, which runs the Ballerina executable JAR

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Added remote debugging support for the command which runs the Ballerina executable JAR
```

I don't get why we need the comma.

Author: It is a grammar rule to use a comma before the word "which" when something is referred to and described more. For information, see https://www.grammarly.com/blog/comma-before-which/#:~:text=Use%20a%20comma%20before%20which,it%20introduces%20an%20indirect%20question..

Reviewer 2: I believe what is referred to is "the command which runs the Ballerina executable JAR". 
@NipunaRanasinghe @praveennadarajah  can you please confirm? 

Maybe this should be

```suggestion
- Added remote debugging support for the command that runs the Ballerina executable JAR
```

Reviewer 5: yes @MaryamZi. And +1 for the suggested change.

> - Added support for debugging single Ballerina tests in Visual Studio Code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Added support for debugging a single Ballerina test in Visual Studio Code
```

Author: @NipunaRanasinghe @praveennadarajah

Reviewer 6: +1 for the change.

### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1 of the repositories below.

> - [Language](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22+label%3ATeam%2FLanguageServer)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- [Language Server](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22+label%3ATeam%2FLanguageServer)
```

Author: Fixed.

### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FjBallerina).

## Standard Library Updates

### New Features

#### `graphql` Package
- Added declarative auth configurations
- Added support for optional types as inputs
- Added support for returning distinct service object unions
- Added support for inline fragments
- Added support for enums as input values

### Improvements

#### `cache` Package
Marked the `cache:Cache` class as an isolated class

#### `file` Package
Marked the `file:Listener` class as an isolated class

#### `graphql` Package
- Improved introspection validation and execution
- Added missing fields in the GraphQL types
- Improved the compiler plugin to validate inputs and return types
- Added support to use included record parameters instead of the `record` type in the listener initialization

#### `http` Package
- Improved the `http:Client` remote methods to support the contextually-expected type inference

> - Changed the configuration parameters of the listeners and clients to include the record parameters

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- Changed the configuration parameters of the listeners and clients to include the record parameters
- Populated the error detail of `http:ClientRequestError` and `http:RemoteServerError` with response payload and header
- Swapped the `mediaType` and `headers` arguments in the client remote methods
```

---
layout: ballerina-left-nav-release-notes
title: Swan Lake Beta1
permalink: /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-beta1/
active: swan-lake-beta1
redirect_from: 
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-beta1
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes
---
## Overview of Ballerina Swan Lake Beta1

> <em>This is the Beta1 release in a series of planned Alpha and Beta releases leading up to the Ballerina Swan Lake GA release.</em> 

Reviewer 2: Do we need to continue to say Alpha now?

```suggestion
<em>This is the Beta1 release in a series of planned Beta releases leading up to the Ballerina Swan Lake GA release.</em> 
```

- Type narrowing will now be reset after a compound assignment.
- Worker message passing after waiting for the same worker has been disallowed.
- When a named worker is used in a `wait` action, it can no longer be used in a variable reference anywhere else.
- When the type-descriptor is ambiguous, it is parsed according to the following table in which the precedence is specified in decreasing order.

  For example, `A & B | C` is considered to be `(A & B) | C`.

  | Operator                  | Associativity |
  |---------------------------|---------------|
  | distinct T                |               |
  | T[ ]                      |               |
  | T1 & T2                   | left          |
  | T1 &#124; T2              | left          |
  | function (args) returns T | right         |

### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFE).

## Runtime Updates

### Improvements

#### Improved Configurable Variables to Support Enum Types

> Configurable variables with enum types are supported to provide values through command-line arguments and a TOML file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Values can be provided for configurable variables of `enum` types via command-line arguments or a TOML file.
```

Author: @HindujaB @warunalakshitha

Reviewer 9: Actually, you can provide values to a configurable variable with both TOML file and command line arg and priority given to cli. So do we need 'or' here?

Reviewer 2: How about
```suggestion
Values can be provided for configurable variables of `enum` types via command-line arguments and a TOML file.
```

> For example, see the configurable variable with the `enum` type.

Reviewer 2: Do we need this sentence?

```suggestion
```

Author: @HindujaB @warunalakshitha

Reviewer 9: We can remove that.

```ballerina
public enum HttpVersion {
    HTTP_1_1,
    HTTP_2
}

> configurable configLib:HttpVersion & readonly httpVersion = ?;

Reviewer 2: Why do we need the `configLib:` prefix here. `& readonly` is redundant and can result in https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues/30717.

```suggestion
configurable HttpVersion httpVersion = ?;
```

Reviewer 2: @HindujaB @warunalakshitha can you please check the suggestions for configurable sections?

Reviewer 9: +1

```

The value for `httpVersion` can be provided via the `Config.toml` file or as a command-line argument as below.

> **TOML:**

Reviewer 7: Avoid using bold here as it will have more prominent view than the Level 4  heading above.

Author: Fixed.

```toml
[configUnionTypes]
httpVersion = "HTTP_1_1"
```

> **Command-line Argument:**

Reviewer 7: Same as above

Author: Fixed.

```bash
-ChttpVersion=HTTP_1_1
```

#### Improved Configurable Variables to Support Map Types

> The `configurable` feature is improved to support variables with the `map` types through the TOML syntax. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `configurable` feature is improved to support variables of `map` types. Values can be provided via a TOML file.
```

Author: @HindujaB @warunalakshitha

For example, if the `map`-typed configurable variables are defined in the following way, 

``` ballerina
configurable map<string> admin = ?;

type HttpResponse record {|
    string method;
    string httpVersion = "HTTP_1_0";
    map<string> headers;
|};

configurable HttpResponse response = ?;
configurable map<string>[] users = ?;
```

the values can be provided in the `Config.toml` as follows.

**TOML:**

```toml
[admin]
username = "John Doe"
mail = "John@hotmail.com"
location = "LK"

[response]
method = "POST"
httpVersion = "HTTP_2_0"
headers.Status = "200 OK"
headers.Content-Type = "text/html"

[[users]]
username = "Jack"
location = "UK"

[[users]]
username = "Jane"
location = "US"
```

### Breaking Changes

> - The `io.ballerina.runtime.api.types.Type#getName` and `io.ballerina.runtime.api.types.Type#getQualifiedName` methods now return an empty string if no name was associated with the type. The `io.ballerina.runtime.api.types.Type#toString` method can be used to get the string representation of a type if required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `io.ballerina.runtime.api.types.Type#getName` and `io.ballerina.runtime.api.types.Type#getQualifiedName` methods now return an empty string if no name was associated with the type. The `io.ballerina.runtime.api.types.Type#toString` method can be used to get the string representation of a type.
```

> - `Wait` actions that wait for expressions that are not named workers can return errors now. The eventual type of such wait future expressions is now `T|error`in which `T` is the type of the original return value.

Reviewer 2: We decided to use "where" here. Please see https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-release/pull/416#discussion_r638750483

```suggestion
- `Wait` actions that wait for expressions that are not named workers can return errors now. The eventual type of such wait future expressions is now `T|error` where `T` is the type of the original return value.
```

## Code to Cloud Updates

### New Features
Added `@cloud:Expose` annotation to support custom listeners.

### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1 of the repositories below.

- [C2C](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-c2c/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22)
- [Docker](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-docker/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22)
- [AWS Lambda](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerinax-aws.lambda/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22)
- [Azure Functions](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerinax-azure.functions/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22) 

## Developer Tools Updates

### Language Server 

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22+label%3ATeam%2FLanguageServer).

> ### New Features

Reviewer 7: Why `Language Server` and `New Features` are both level 3 headings? It seems we need to move the bug fixes listed under the topic `Language Server ` to the Level 3 h eading of `Bug Fixes` below.

Author: Fixed.

#### Debugger
- Added remote debugging support for the command, which runs the Ballerina executable JAR
- Added support for debugging single Ballerina tests in Visual Studio Code

### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta1 of the repositories below.

- [Language](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta1%22+label%3ATeam%2FLanguageServer)
- [OpenAPI](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-openapi/milestone/5?closed=1) 

> ### Ballerina Packages Updates

Reviewer 7: This is empty? @azinneera

Author: Removed.

Reviewer 10: Yes, we didn't introduce anything. Only improvements and bug fixes were done.

> ## Breaking Changes

Reviewer 7: Shouldn't we move this topic to somewhere else. Having this here is not appropriate IMO, It should be a topic under one of the  above 4 high level sections.

Author: Moved under "Language Breaking Changes".

> Taint analyzer is disabled and the `--taint-check` option is removed. The annotations `@tainted` and `@untainted` were left intact as placeholders for backward compatibility. Any script that used to pass the `--taint-check` option to the `bal run` or `bal build` commands will fail.

Reviewer 7: The
```suggestion
The Taint analyzer is disabled and the `--taint-check` option is removed. The annotations `@tainted` and `@untainted` were left intact as placeholders for backward compatibility. Any script that used to pass the `--taint-check` option to the `bal run` or `bal build` commands will fail.
```
